# Lecture 5 - Notes  

**January 18, 2016**  

### Today

1. Finish comparison based sorting
2. 2-3 and Red-Black Trees

 
## Comparison Based Bounds

| Problem                 | Size   | Lower Bound                     | Upper Bound                    | Reason                                   |
|-------------------------|--------|---------------------------------|--------------------------------|------------------------------------------|
| max                     | of $n$ | $O(n-1)$                        | $O(n-1)$                       | See [graph theory proof](#max)           |
| merge                   | $n+n$  | $O(2n-1)$                       | $O(2n-1)$                      | See [adversarial argument proof](#merge) |
| search on ordered table | $n$    | $O(\lg n)$                      | $\lceil \lg n \rceil$          | Information Theory                       |
| max & min               | of $n$ | $\lceil \frac{3}{2}n -2 \rceil$ | $\lceil \frac{3}{n} -2 \rceil$ | Tricky adversarial argument              |
| max & next              | of $n$ | $n + \lceil \lg n \rceil - 1$   | $n + \lceil \lg n \rceil - 1$  | Tricky adversarial argument              |
| sorting                 | $n$    | $O(n \ log n)$                  | $\lceil \lg n! \rceil$         | Information theory                       |

__Note:__ I know that $O(2n-1) = O(n)$ but Ruskey insists on "more accurate numbers". So I've added the big-o's even though they aren't strictly necessary.

### Max

__Theorem__: $n - 1$ is the best upper bound for finding the maximum in an unordered array.

__Proof__: Make a graph $G = (V,E)$,

$$
    V = \text{ vertices } = \{a_1, a_2, ..., a_n \}
$$

Each time a comparison is made say $a_i \lt a_j$ add the edge $(i,j)$. If the algorithm is correct, then at the end $G$ must be connected. For $G$ to be connected it must have at least $\left|E\right| \ge n - 1$ edges.

### Merge

__Theorem__: $2n - 1$ is the best upper bound for the merge operation.

__Proof__: Suppose the input is ordered so that,

$$
    a_1 \lt b_1 \lt \underbrace{a_2 \lt b_2}_\text{not made} \lt ... \lt a_n \lt b_n
$$

If some comparison, either $a_i \lt b_i$ or $b_i \lt a_{i+1}$ is not made, then the algorithm will fail. This is called an _adversarial argument_.

### Max & Min

If we use a tree to model the comparisons, we have $\frac{n}{2}$ comparisons on the first row. Since an extended binary tree has $N - 1$ internal nodes (where $N$ is the number of leaves), and our comparison tree has $\frac{n}{2}$ leaves

$$\begin{align}
    \text{Comparisons} &= \frac{n}{2} + 2 \left( \frac{n}{2} - 1 \right) \newline
    &= \frac{3}{2}n -2
\end{align}$$

### Max & Next Max

If we use a tree like before, the next maxes will all be those that lost to the first max. Since we have one on each level we have another "sub" comparison set.

## Balanced Search Trees

### [Slides](http://algs4.cs.princeton.edu/lectures/33BalancedSearchTrees.pdf)

### 2-3 Trees

_definition_: A __2-3 Tree__ is a search tree which allows,

* __2-node__: one key, two children _or_
* __3-node__: two keys, three children

and we maintain,

- **Symmetric order**: Inorder traversal yields keys in ascending order
- **Perfect balance**: Every path from root to null link has same length

#### Search

Search work more-or-less as it would on a binary search tree working it's way down from the root.

#### Insertion

If we insert into a 2-node we can just make it a 3-node. If we insert into a 3-node,

* Add new key to 3-node to create temporary 4-node
* Move middle key in 4-node into parent
* Repeat up the tree, as necessary
* If you reach the root and it's a 4-node, split it into three 2-nodes

Because the rest of the tree isn't affected, splitting a 4-node is a __local transformation__ and requires __constant time__.


#### _Perfect Balance_

Perfect balance means that every path from the root to a leaf is the same length. The height is therefore,

|            | Tree Height | Reason      |
|------------|-------------|-------------|
| Worst Case | $\lg N$     | All 2-nodes |
| Best Case  | $\log_3 N$  | All 3-nodes |

In practice this means between 12 and 20 for a million nodes and between 18 and 30 for a billion nodes. The bottom line is 2-3 trees provide __guaranteed logarithmic performance__.

#### _Implementation_

Directly implementing a 2-3 tree is complicated, because,

* Maintaining multiple node types is cumbersome
* Need multiple compares to move down tree
* Need to move back up the tree to split 4-nodes
* Large number of cases for splitting

for example,

```java
public void put(Key key, Value val)
{
  Node x = root;
  while (x.getTheCorrectChild(key) != null)
  {
    x = x.getTheCorrectChildKey();
    if (x.is4Node()) x.split();
  }
  if (x.is2Node()) x.make3Node(key, val);
  else if (x.is3Node()) x.make4Node(key, val);
}
```

### Red-Black Trees

A better way to represent a represent a 2-3 tree using a binary tree with one edge used as the "glue" edge to create a 3-node. We apply the arbitrary restriction the the red link are on the left.

_definition_: A __Red-Black Tree__ is a binary search tree where,

* No node has two red links connected to it
* Every path from root to null link has the same number of black links (perfect black balance)
* Red links lean left

this tree also has a one-to-one correspondence with a 2-3 tree.

#### Search

Search is the same as a normal binary search tree but faster because of better balance.
