# Lecture 2 - Notes  

### January 7, 2016  

## Encoding Trees

Mark internal nodes with ones and leaves with zeros. We then do a preorder traversal. This gives us a sequence, e.g.,

$$
    11100011000
$$

This __tree sequence__ let's us create a well formed parenthesis string.

$$
    \underset{1}(\underset{1}(\underset{1}(\underset{0})\underset{0})\underset{0})\underset{1}(\underset{1}( \underset{0}) \underset{0})
$$

This parenthesis string is _unique_ to that tree.

## Union Find

Given a set of $N$ object we would like to,

* Connect two objects
* Test if theirs a path between two objects

To find out if a _static_ graph is connected you could use DFS or BFS which is $O(|V| + |E|)$.

In this _dynamic_ environment we are adding edges to the graph. We assume "is connected to" to be an equivalence relation. We will therefor use sets to encapsulate components, when creating edges we will check which set each node is in then join the two sets.

```cs
class UF
{
    UF (int n)
    
    void union(int p,  int q)
    
    int find(int p)
    
    boolean connected(int p, int q)
}
```

### Quick Find

#### Data structure

* Integer array `id[]` of length `N`
* Interpretation `id[p]` is the id of the component containing `p`

#### Example

```
          0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
    id = [0,1,1,8,8,0,0,1,8,8]
```

So 0, 5 and 6 are connected, etc.

* `find(p)`: Lookup `p` by index
* `connected(p,q)`: Do `p` and `q` have the same id?
* `union(p,q)`: Change all entries were id is `id[p]` to `id[q]`



### Quick Union

#### Data Structure

* Integer array `id[]` of length `N`
* Interpretation `id[i]` is the parent of `i`
* Root of `i` is `id[id[...id[i]...]]`

```
          0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
    id = [0,1,9,4,9,6,6,7,8,9]
```

* `find(p)`: What is the root of `p`
* `connected(p,q)`: Do `p` and `q` have the same root?
* `union(p,q)`: Set the id of `p`'s root to the id of `q`'s root

### Issues

Both of the these operation are too expensive,

|  Algorithm  | intialize |  union |  find  | connected |
|:-----------:|:---------:|:------:|:------:|:---------:|
|  Quick Find |   $O(N)$  | $O(N)$ | $O(1)$ |   $O(1)$  |
| Quick Union |   $O(N)$  | $O(N)$ | $O(N)$ |   $O(N)$  |

#### Quick Find

* Unions are expensive
* Trees are flat but it's expensive to eep them flat

#### Quick Union

* Trees can get very tall
* Find/connect is expensive

### Weighted Quick Union

* Modify Quick Union to avoid tall trees
* Keep track of the size of each tree
* Balance by linking smaller tree to root of larger tree

#### Data Structure

Same as Quick Union but maintain an extra array `sz[i]` that counts the number of objects rooted at `i`.

* `find(p)`/`connected(p,q)`: Same as Quick Union
* `Union(p,q)`: Link the smaller tree to the larger tree, update `sz[]`

#### Efficiency

|       Algorithm      | initialize |    union    |     find    |  connected  |
|:--------------------:|:----------:|:-----------:|:-----------:|:-----------:|
|      Quick Find      |   $O(N)$   |    $O(N)$   |    $O(1)$   |    $O(1)$   |
|      Quick Union     |   $O(N)$   |    $O(N)$   |    $O(N)$   |    $O(N)$   |
| Weighted Quick Union | $O(N)$     | $O(\lg{N})$ | $O(\lg{N})$ | $O(\lg{N})$ |
